bbGibson Assembly for Biobrick Parts
====================================

A universal, reusable set of primers for assembling Biobrick parts

The original Gibson assembly method allows scar-less assembly of
multiple parts generated by PCR in a single reaction using in vitro
recombination. One drawback of using the Gibson method for rapid
prototyping of biological devices is that it requires custom primers to
be designed for each part and each specific assembly. The turnaround for
commercial oligonucleotide synthesis services is typically several days,
and can be weeks in some parts of the world. Additionally, the cost of
multiple custom primers can become prohibitive, particularly when
prototyping many variations of a device. Here, we propose a method that
allows assembly of Biobrick parts into composite devices using a set of
standard reusable primers, termed bbGibson primers, with the trade off
that ~40 bp scars are introduced between parts. The resulting composite
devices maintain Biobrick (BBRFC10) compatibility.

The advantage of using ‘universal’ bbGibson primers over ‘part specific
primers’ is that users can purchase a set of universal primers only
once, which can then be used for multiple projects when rapidly
prototyping devices. We have endeavoured to design scar regions such
that they are unlikely to interfere with transcription and translation,
and do not contain illegal restriction sites with respect to RFC10 (&
21/23/25 ?), making composite devices produced using this method
compatible with other commonly used assembly standards.

In bbGibson primers are designed in pairs, and are composed of a
connector sequence and a mutant Biobrick prefix or mutant Biobrick
suffix:

#### Forward bbGibson primer:

    5’ [connector] - [prefix*] 3’

#### Reverse bbGibson primer:

    5’ [connector’] - [suffix’*] 3’

[connector] is complementary to [connector’]. 
[prefix*] is complementary to the Biobrick prefix, except for
substitutions introduced to remove EcoRI and XbaI sites. [suffix’*] is
the reverse complement of the Biobrick suffix, with substitutions to
remove the SpeI and PstI sites.

Connectors are randomly generated sequences, typically ~ 30 bp long,
form complementary pairs, and are filtered to meet certain requirements.
Requirements for connector sequences are:

1.  Should not contain any ATG start codons, both on the coding and
    non-coding strand
2.  Should not contain restriction sites in the Biobrick suffix and
    prefix (RFC10), or sites used in RFC 12, 21, 23 and 25.
3.  Should not contain significant complementarity to a Biobrick prefix
    or suffix in the connector region (or the prefix and suffix used by
    other common standard, and any standard pSB vector sequence)
4.  Should not contain stable hairpin sequences that could act as a
    terminator and effect translation in polycistronic parts. These can
    be detected using Mfold or UNAFold (For generic connector sequences,
    we can only account for hairpins within the connector, not between
    the connector and an arbitrary coding sequence).
5.  A connector (A) should not contain significant complementarity to
    any other connector sequence (eg B), apart from perfect
    complementarity to it’s cognate pair (A’). The threshold for
    ‘significant complementarity’ is determined by the amount of of
    pairing that would occur between non-cognate connectors (A-B pair)
    at 50 oC (the Gibson Assembly reaction temperature). (A target of
    non-cognate pairs being \> 90 % ‘melted’ at 50 oC seems reasonable).
    Cognate pairs (A-A’) should be selected such that they are \> 95 %
    annealed at 50 oC.
6.  Should avoid inadvertently incorporating any (weak) RBS, known
    promoter sequence or Kozak sequence (eg K165002). While the
    probability of these sequences occurring by random chance is low, it
    remains a possibility that could interfere with device operation
    when generating long connector sequences and/or devices that involve
    many connector pairs.

To ensure that composite parts generated by the bbGibson assembly method
remain Biobrick compatible, internal Biobrick prefixes and suffixes are
mutated in the initial PCR step to remove the EcoRI, XbaI, SpeI and PstI
sites. The intact prefix and suffix at the 5’ and 3’ ends of the
composite part are preserved by using the primers described in BBF RFC
57 (section 7.2)
[[http://www.cambridgeigem.org/RFC57.pdf](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cambridgeigem.org%2FRFC57.pdf&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNF1FVWl71qoLWLm0inVEMFR2sXlYA)].

#### Prefix(*) (EcoRI and XbaI mutated)
#### Forward primer for downstream (right) part

                   -EcoRI-             XbaI--
    original       G                   T
    5’ connector - cAA TTC GCG GCC GCT gCT AG 3’

(according to the IDT oligo calculator, these mismatches in the
complementary prefix region should lower the Tm by \~ 5 degrees, such
that the calculated Tm of \~ 61 degrees for the complementary region
should be \~ 56 degrees in the initial cycles. The Tm of the complete
primer annealing to products will be \> 60 degrees by design)

#### Suffix(*) (SpeI and PstI mutated)
#### Reverse primer for upstream (left) part, coding strand

        SpeI----           -PstI--
        A                   T        original
    5’ TgC TAG TAG CGG CCG CgG CAG - connector 3’

The reverse complement of this sequence, which should be incorporated
into bbGibson primers is:

    5’ connector’ - CTGCCGCGGCCGCTACTAGCA 3’

Point mutations to remove EcoRI, XbaI, SpeI and PstI restriction sites
have been chosen to to substitute with a G or C toward the end of the
prefix or suffix to provide better “GC clamps”.

(In initial cycles use initial annealing temp ~ 10 degrees lower than
Tm of ~ 66 for complementary suffix region. The Tm of the complete
primer annealing to products will be > 60 degrees by design)

Proposed protocol for finding spurious priming of connectors with
existing Biobrick parts, etc:

1.  BLAST connector sequence against whole Registry, including any
    previously generated connector pairs, forward and reverse
    complement.
2.  Take highest identity hits, determine Tm of pairing.
3.  If Tm is equal or higher to Tm of prefix(*)-prefix or
    suffix(\*)-suffix pairing, discard the connector and trial another
    one.

Proposed alternative reverse primer for upstream (left) part, coding
strand

Suspect that the A->G substitution near the end of the primer is
causing problems for PCR.

Proposing the this alternative mutagenic suffix be used which avoids
mutation near the end of the annealing region.

        SpeI----           -PstI--
               T                 G   original
    5’ TAC TAG cAG CGG CCG CTG CAc - connector 3’

Standard plasmid amplification primers and end part connectors

Primers to amplify and facilitate Gibson assembly of parts into standard
vector backbones (pSB1-series) were described in BBF RFC 57 (section
7.2), and these can be used for Universal Gibson assembly also.

We have renamed these primers to simplify nomenclature and reduce human
error when used for Universal Gibson assembly - the BBF RFC 57 naming in
provided in brackets.

#### A.f (extnd.prt.f)

    5’ ttcgctaaggatgatttctgGAATTCGCGGCCGCTTCTAGA

A.f should be used to amplify the first part, typically along with
primer A.r

(Capitalized bases anneal to prefix (-). Lowercase bases are added &
complementary to a terminator region adjacent to the prefix in the
standard vectors. 5’ chewback of this PCR product will make this a
sticky end that is complementary with the vector (+) strand )\

#### END.r (extnd.prt.r)

    5’ ttgcccgtttttttgccggaCTGCAGCGGCCGCTACTAGT

END.r should be used to amplify the last part, along with the
appropriate forward primer (in an assembly of four parts A, B, C and D,
the forward/reverse primer pair used for PCR would be D.f / END.r)

(Capitalized bases anneal to suffix (+) strand. Lowercase bases are
added & complementary to a region of the terminator next to the suffix
region in the standard vectors. 5’ chewback of this PCR product will
make this a sticky end that is complementary with the vector (-) strand
)

#### V.f (amplBkBn.f)

    5’ TACTAGTAGCGGCCGCTGCA

(anneals to the Biobrick suffix + nearby region in the ‘- strand’)

#### V.r (amplBkBn.r)

    5’ CTCTAGAAGCGGCCGCGAAT

(anneals to the Biobrick prefix + nearby region in the ‘+ strand’)

(deprecated in favor of a version without the 5’ C)

#### V.r (modified amplBkBn.r)

    5’ TCTAGAAGCGGCCGCGAAT

(anneals to the Biobrick prefix + nearby region in the ‘+ strand’)
Compared with amplBkBn.r described in BBF RFC57, this primer has the 5’
C base removed to ensure there is no unpaired bases which may induce
frameshifts when annealing at the prefix side of a vector-coding
sequence connection.

V.f and V.r each have a Tm close to ~60 degrees, and should be used to
amplify the vector backbone. The linear product will be
[suffix]-vector-[prefix]. EcoRI, XbaI, SpeI and PstI sites are
preserved.

Naming conventions and assembly
-------------------------------

The pre-generated primer sequences provided here are named to facilitate
easy assembly and reduce human error.

For example, if you wanted to assemble the following composite part:

    partJ - partK - partL - partM

from Biobrick compatible basic parts, into a standard vector pSB1xx, the
following PCR amplifications would be required.

[](#)[](#)

<table>
<tr><th>Template</th><th>Forward primer</th><th>Reverse primer</th></tr>
<tr><td>pSB1xx</td><td>V.f</td><td>V.r</td></tr>
<tr><td>partJ</td><td>A.f</td><td>A.r</td></tr>
<tr><td>partK</td><td>B.f</td><td>B.r</td></tr>
<tr><td>partL</td><td>C.f</td><td>C.r</td></tr>
<tr><td>partM</td><td>D.f</td><td>END.r</td></tr>
</table>

Primers are paired using the same letter forward and reverse primer in a
single PCR reaction. In the final bbGibson assembly, the sequential
order of the parts in the composite part will be alphabetical. The
exception is the final part in the series, which requires the END.r
reverse primer in order to construct complementary overhangs with the
vector backbone.

RBS and promoter connector primers
----------------------------------

While bbGibson connectors are a convenient way to connect large, ‘self
contained’ Biobrick parts, one significant drawback is that a 40+ bp
scar sequence is introduced between each part due to the connector
sequence. This is not a significant issue when connecting ‘translational
units’ which contain their own ribosome binding sites (RBS) (or ‘protein
generator parts’ which also contain their own promoter), however a 40+
bp scar is not acceptable when constructing a promoter-RBS-CDS (PRC)
unit since in order to function, the RBS requires precise spacing
relative to the start codon. The optimum spacing between the translation
initiation site in the RBS and the start codon is ~ 6 - 8 bp (ref). We
would expect to seen no significant translation with an RBS-CDS spacing
of ~ 40 bp.

(another solution not yet explored - build promoter-RBS or promoter-only
sequences into connector region of the A.f / V.r complementary pair,
since the promoter-RBS spacing is also important. Equivalent to the RBS
connectors below, we can make promoter connectors that can be used to
amplify RBS-CDS protein generators and add a promoter with correct
spacing).

Due to the requirement of precise spacing between an RBS and the start
codon for maximum translational efficiency, standard bbGibson primers
that prime to the Biobrick prefix cannot be used. In this case, custom
per-part forward primers need to be designed.

      A-(rbs)B-(rbs)C
      --connector-- ----RBS----- spacer --part seq--
              B.f - aaagaggagaaa xxxxxx ATGnnnnnnnnn
    suffix* - A.r
    
              C.f - aaagaggagaaa yyyyyy ATGnnnnnnnnn
    suffix* - B.r

Forward RBS primer length: 40+12+6+12 = 70 bp

Since these custom forward primers contain standard connector sequences,
they can be paired with the common reverse bbGibson primers.

#### Designs for universal but suboptimal RBS connectors

As with standard connector primers, priming to the Biobrick prefix is
possible for an RBS connector, but will give sub-optimal spacing between
the RBS and the start codon due to the presence of the full 20 base
pairs of the Biobrick prefix.

Using an alternative mutant prefix, we can incorporate a strong RBS
(part B0034) closer to the start codon by overlapping the RBS and the 5’
prefix region:

                           -----prefix*ii------
                   --- RBS ----
    5’ connector - aaagaggaGAAaTCGCGGCCGCTgCTAG - (ATG--part--) 3’

Using the full length prefix means the spacing between the RBS and the
start codon is still 16 bp - not close to the optimal 6 \~ 8.

Alternatively, truncating from the 5’ end of the prefix and including
the ATG from the coding sequence provides a 12 bp spacing (still
sub-optimal, but better):

                   --- RBS ----        XbaI--
    original                           T
    5’ connector - aaagaggagaaa GGCCGCTgCTAG ATG 3’

I did some quick tests using the Voigt RBS tool
([http://voigtlab.ucsf.edu/software/reverse](http://voigtlab.ucsf.edu/software/reverse))
and the part BBa\_I13522 (tetR-RBS-GFP) as a template, varying the
RBS-6bp-ATG spacing. The predictions suggest that the 16 bp spacer will
give very low expression (two orders of magnitude less than the 6 bp
spacer), while the 12 bp spacer is predicted to give only ~ 30-fold less
expression.

Conclusion: Given that the impact of translation efficiency is still
large even for a 12 bp spacer, it would seem that this style of
re-usable RBS connector would be of limited utility.

TODO: Investigate the use of a mini cistron, as in the pTrc vectors, to
allow larger spacing between the RBS and the part start codon. The
mini-cistron would include codons from the prefix. This will be a
significantly different system to the usual RBS-NNNNNN-ATG
configuration, but by confer some advantages.

** TODO: Term.f and Term.r primers ? **

Explore the possibility of incorporating unique terminators into the
connector regions.

Here we would deliberately incorporate small artificial terminator
hairpins, while still ensuring no hybridization between non-cognate
connectors.

Consider how to incorporate a strong terminator in place of the END.r
and V.f primer pair, since this would be a common location to require a
terminator in many devices.

Analysis
--------

Determine how often two randomly generated connectors contain
significant complementarity (eg, a histogram of Tm’s, all-against-all,
in a set of randomly generated connectors).

eg.

1.  Generate 10000 random connectors
2.  Determine Tm of each pair
3.  Plot on histogram

Gibson assembly is done at 50o C - we want to determine how often two
randomly generated connectors may show significant annealing during this
reaction. This will allow us to determine how effective the strategy of
generating random connectors will be when the number of connector pairs
becomes large (eg, for whole genome assembly).

Protocol
--------

Based on the ‘one step isothermal DNA assembly method’ in Gibson et al,
2009.

5x isothermal reaction buffer: 25% PEG-8000, 500 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 50
mM MgCl2,

50mM DTT, 1mM each of the four dNTPs and 5mM NAD.

DNA assembly reaction (40 ul total volume):

1.  8 ul 5x isothermal buffer
2.  0.8 ul of 0.2 U ul–1 T5 exonuclease (Epicentre Biotechnologies)
3.  4 ul of 40 U ul–1 Taq DNA ligase
4.  0.5 ul of 2 U ul–1 Phusion DNA polymerase
5.  DNA fragments (kit purified PCR products): approximately 10–100 ng
    of each for 6 kb DNA segments, equimolar amounts. For larger DNA
    segments, proportional amounts of DNA should be used (for example,
    250 ng of each 150 kb DNA segment).
6.  (this suggests for a 2.5 kb pSB1x3 series vector and ~ 1 kb parts,
    10 - 20 ng each should be enough, given that these are all smaller
    than 6 kb ?)
7.  Sterile nuclease-free water up to a volume of 40 ul

Incubate at 50 oC for 15 to 60 min, (60 min incubations are optimal).

Transform the entire reaction into competent cells.

All isothermal assembly components (“Gibson assembly master mix” from
BBRFC 57) can be stored at –20 oC in a single mixture at 1.33
concentration for more than one year. T5 exonuclease can be diluted 1:50
from 10 U ul–1 in its storage buffer (50% glycerol, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH
7.5, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 M NaCl and 0.1% Triton X-100). The
enzymes are still active after more than ten freeze-thaw cycles. To
constitute a reaction, 5 ul DNA was added to 15 ul of this mixture.

Testing
-------

Use a tetR-RBS-RFP-(connector)-RBS-GFP-[TT] construct, comparing to a
control, to determine the effect on PoPs when the polymerase reads
through the connector sequence, and the effect of the connector on
translation rate.

Links to methods for measurement of terminator efficiency:
[http://partsregistry.org/Help:Terminators/Measurement](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fpartsregistry.org%2FHelp%3ATerminators%2FMeasurement&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHX-oHwQqBSkKt5Re_nf0e3PHSIDw)
- in the case of bbGibson connectors, we are generally working to avoid
unintentionally incorporating a terminator (even if only weak), however
the measurement methods above are the basis for confirming that
connectors do not contribute significantly to termination.

Future development ideas
------------------------

1.  Embed Golden Gate
    ([http://j5.jbei.org/j5manual/pages/23.html](http://j5.jbei.org/j5manual/pages/23.html))
    restriction sites and unique 4-base overhangs into connectors, just
    adjacent to prefix and suffix annealing regions. This would allow
    the option of Golden Gate assembly using the same primers. (Use two
    different type IIs enzymes, alternating between B/C+C/D and D/E+E/F
    connector pairs to increase the chance that a 5’ and 3’ connector
    pair can be used for any part without cutting a spurious internal
    site ?).
2.  Devise a set of restriction site to embed into primers that would
    allow easy assembly verification by restriction mapping (beyond the
    EcoRI/PstI for cutting out the whole assembly and NotI for cutting
    between every parts).
3.  Consider how to do multi-step assembly, in the way that Gibson et al
    have used for the Mycoplasma genitalium genome and the mouse
    mitochondrial genome. Essentially, connectors would need to be
    incorporated at the ends of an assembly (in the V.r/Af and END.r/V.f
    interfaces) with a particular restriction site that can be used to
    cut the intermediate part out as a linear fragment and use it in
    another round of assembly (prepared via transformation, miniprep and
    restriction digest, not PCR). The restriction site(s) should be ones
    that are unlikely to appear in Biobrick parts. EcoRI, XbaI, SpeI and
    PstI would make good candidates, except this would break backward
    compatibility with standard Biobrick assembly. All existing
    connectors could be redesigned to incorporate this restriction site,
    or a second set of ‘level 2’ connectors could be designed, which are
    used on the ends of intermediate parts destined for multi-step
    assembly. There is an additional advantage to adding
    “end-connectors” as a standard feature - if it is known which end
    connectors a part uses, they can be used as priming sites for
    specific PCR amplification using a high annealing temperature,
    avoiding the problem of internal priming to mutagenized Biobrick
    prefix/suffix sequences.

See also
--------

The original Gibson et al paper:
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1318](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fdx.doi.org%2F10.1038%2Fnmeth.1318&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGUUnRDY5PA96Vx_78acaJqMcd2fA)

BBF RFC 57 describes Gibson Assembly using part-specific primers
[[http://www.cambridgeigem.org/RFC57.pdf](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cambridgeigem.org%2FRFC57.pdf&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNF1FVWl71qoLWLm0inVEMFR2sXlYA)].

Team:Cambridges Gibson Assembly protocol:
[http://2010.igem.org/Team:Cambridge/Gibson/Protocol](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2F2010.igem.org%2FTeam%3ACambridge%2FGibson%2FProtocol&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGMkMm1PcnbCcotwOV39Chx9j8cTg)

Detailed Gibson assembly protocol from Cambridge:
[http://www.synbio.org.uk/dna-assembly/guidetogibsonassembly.html](http://www.synbio.org.uk/dna-assembly/guidetogibsonassembly.html)

A modified Gibson protocol (j5 automated assembly) which uses less T5
exonuclease, optimised for shorter fragments:
[http://j5.jbei.org/j5manual/pages/79.html](http://j5.jbei.org/j5manual/pages/79.html)

Team:Washington’s Gibson Assembly primer designs, based on the BglBrick
standard:
[http://2010.igem.org/Team:Washington/Tools\_Used/Next-Gen\_Cloning](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2F2010.igem.org%2FTeam%3AWashington%2FTools_Used%2FNext-Gen_Cloning&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNH1SYsWid5Q9yG2b1XX4Kna81aaQQ)

The J5 manual contains some good descriptions of Gibson Assembly and
related techniques:
[http://jbei-exwebapp.lbl.gov/j5/j5manual/pages/1.html](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fjbei-exwebapp.lbl.gov%2Fj5%2Fj5manual%2Fpages%2F1.html&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGbxp5Yj0wMSeB3eJdDBlcP52Thzw)

References
----------

The original Gibson et al paper:
[http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1318](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fdx.doi.org%2F10.1038%2Fnmeth.1318&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGUUnRDY5PA96Vx_78acaJqMcd2fA)

Lesnik E a, Sampath R, Levene HB, Henderson TJ, McNeil J a, Ecker DJ.
Prediction of rho-independent transcriptional terminators in Escherichia
coli. [Internet]. Nucleic acids research. 2001 Sep ;29(17):3583-94.
Available from:
[http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=55870&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.pubmedcentral.nih.gov%2Farticlerender.fcgi%3Fartid%3D55870%26tool%3Dpmcentrez%26rendertype%3Dabstract&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNG3iFDMt4cX4CidRKPfPYWxz6KU4Q)
(shows free-energy of stem loops for known E. coli terminators,
providing an upper limit for hairpin free energy in connectors to avoid
possible weak terminators)

